COMPARISON: codex vs claude-opus-5 on one Lean target
recorded 2026-08-11 04:0x, HEAD a849d58, table v0.3.4

TARGET      Evidence.Cert.transPort_LBT (m) : transPort (L m) = LBT m
            the last open link of the reader chain; transPort_rungPS_of_L
            already consumes it.  True at 13 measured points.

DESIGN      One brief, sent to both arms at the same time.  The two prompts
            differ ONLY in the workdir path and the -m label; the body is
            byte-identical otherwise.
              arm-codex   codex        /tmp/.../cx6
              arm-claude  claude-opus-5 /tmp/.../cl1

WHY NOW     Earlier tonight's Claude workers cannot be compared against
            tonight's codex workers: they got worse briefs, at a time when I
            had the route wrong, and without the native_decide prohibition.
            The confound is mine, not theirs.  By now the brief carries
            everything that was learned:
              - the dead route (append / runAux) named WITH its reason
              - the fuel measured and tabulated, incl. the three
                insensitivity checks, so neither arm has to find it
              - the 62 names already in the library
              - plan/worker-spec.md for every standing rule
            So brief quality is equalised, and what differs is the model.

NOT CONTROLLED, and it matters
            - single trial, one target, no repetition
            - the target may be easy or impossible; unknown at issue time
            - the two harnesses differ (codex runs in a sandbox via the
              codex-rescue subagent; the Claude arm is an in-process subagent
              with the normal tool set)
            - I wrote the brief after five codex sessions and zero recent
              Claude sessions, so its phrasing may fit codex's habits
            So this can support "both reached / neither reached / one reached"
            as an observation.  It cannot support a general quality ranking.

MEASURED    reached the target (theorem present, exit 0 verified by me)
            axioms: Classical.choice / native_decide / sorry
            obedience: did it follow the three-step shape, or invent
                       adjacent work
            volume: lines, theorems
            honesty: did it report a non-zero exit plainly

PRIOR OBSERVATIONS, uncontrolled, from tonight
            - neither codex nor Claude reported back spontaneously; every
              verdict tonight came from me re-running the check
            - two "clean-looking" proofs were rejected this way
            - threads that had committed to a direction did not turn on
              instruction: 3 Claude threads and 1 codex thread, 4 of 4
            - fresh threads followed the initial brief in both families
            - codex documented a limitation of its own artifact unprompted
              (its "append" lemma's docstring says it does NOT split the run)

RESULT      BOTH ARMS REACHED THE TARGET.  Single trial.

                                    codex (cx6)     claude-opus-5 (cl1)
            transPort_LBT present   yes             yes
            statement as specified  yes             yes      (no added hypotheses)
            exit code (re-run by me) 0              0
            hash stable across check yes            yes
            axioms, ALL theorems    propext /       propext /
                                    Quot.sound      Quot.sound
              of which axiom-free   10 of 43        7 of 65
            Classical.choice        0               0
            native_decide           0               0
            sorry                   0               0
            forbidden routes used   none            none
            library names redefined 0 of 62         0 of 62
            lines / theorems        837 / 43        774 / 65
            wall clock to quiet     ~60 min         ~40 min

            The one visible difference is HOW they used the fuel result I
            handed them: codex leans on it heavily (45 mentions of transFuel),
            claude uses it 6 times and assembles the induction differently.
            Same destination, different road.  Neither is better by any
            measurement I made.

WHAT THIS SETTLES, AND ONLY THIS
            Earlier tonight three Claude workers failed nine attempts on this
            same area.  That was NOT a capability gap.  Given the same brief --
            dead route named with its reason, fuel measured and tabulated,
            62 library names listed, standing rules in worker-spec.md -- both
            models cleared it on the first try.  The nine failures were mine:
            I asked for a lemma that could not exist, and I omitted the
            native_decide prohibition.

WHAT IT DOES NOT SETTLE
            Everything in NOT CONTROLLED above.  One target, one trial.  No
            claim about quality ordering is supported, and none is made.

MY OWN INSTRUMENT FAILED FOUR TIMES TONIGHT, all in the green direction
            - the axiom sweep did not look for native_decide at all
            - the math checker was blind to inline math spanning a newline
            - the settle detector read a 60s pause as "finished", twice
            - the axiom tally counted 'depends on axioms: [...]' but not
              'does not depend on any axioms', dropping 17 of 108 theorems --
              and those 17 were the CLEANEST ones
            The last is the sharpest: an instrument that discards the best
            results as unmeasured.  Every one of these read as green or as
            complete when it was neither.

